docs/programming_guides/scala.markdown, before:

--- 
layout: inner_docs
title: Scala Programming Guide
---

## Scala Programming Guide
<p class="lead"><strong>Our Scala programming guide is coming soon.</strong> Meanwhile, you can go through our recent Scala presentations from the <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/events/2013/summit.html">Stratosphere Summit</a>.</p>

### <strong>Stratosphere Scala Frontend</strong> by Aljoscha Krettek

<p class="text-center"><iframe src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OL3vlQ1HjE0lmC_dZp5mEveFuybd8RzkRBvEky77Ff4/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000" frameborder="0" width="800" height="400" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe></p>

### <strong>Scala Introduction</strong> by Vasia Kalavri
<p class="text-center"><iframe src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1mzhjO-hb_ZNTHPaPiGPWDRyYufOig2CwNysW57eyQLU/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000" frameborder="0" width="800" height="400" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe></p>

Commit message:

added documentation for Stratosphere programming model

docs/programming_guides/scala.markdown, after:

--- 
layout: inner_docs
title: Scala Programming Guide
---

Writing Stratosphere Programs in Scala
=====================================
This guide explains how to develop Stratosphere programs with the Scala programming interface.
It assumes you are familiar with the general concepts of Stratosphere's [Programming Model](pmodel.html "Programming Model").
We recommend to learn about the basic concepts first, before continuing with the [Java](java.html "Java Programming Guide") or the Scala programming guide.

## Scala Programming Guide
<p class="lead"><strong>Our Scala programming guide is coming soon.</strong> Meanwhile, you can go through our recent Scala presentations from the <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/events/2013/summit.html">Stratosphere Summit</a>.</p>

### <strong>Stratosphere Scala Frontend</strong> by Aljoscha Krettek

<p class="text-center"><iframe src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OL3vlQ1HjE0lmC_dZp5mEveFuybd8RzkRBvEky77Ff4/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000" frameborder="0" width="800" height="400" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe></p>

### <strong>Scala Introduction</strong> by Vasia Kalavri
<p class="text-center"><iframe src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1mzhjO-hb_ZNTHPaPiGPWDRyYufOig2CwNysW57eyQLU/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000" frameborder="0" width="800" height="400" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe></p>
